###Range-for statement:

C++ syntax is extended to support easier iteration over a list of elements. For example:  

[**Try it live.**](http://ideone.com/fRoN2j)  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
int main()
{

  vector<int> v {1,2,3,4,5};

  for(auto& i:v)  // reference to element
  {
    cout<<i<<endl;
    i +=1;        // modifies element value
  }

  for(auto i:v)   // copy of element
  {
    cout<<i<<endl;
  }
  return 0;
}

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Range-for statements work for any type where `begin()` and `end()` are defined and return iterators.  

The use of range-for loops increases code readability. However, programmers often need both, the elements 
of an iterable collection and its index. This is not directly supported in C++11.  

Unless optimized away by compiler, using a copy of element could come at a performance cost if the element type is large.

**Recommendation:**  
-  Range-for loops are useful and should be allowed.   
-  Ordinary loops should be preferred when programmer needs the element index. Avoid having your own counter.  
-  Using reference to elements is encouraged when dealing with large objects. Use `const` reference when you don't need to modify the object state.  


###Override controls: override
No explicit keyword is needed to to override a virtual function in C++98. In C++11, keyword `override` has been
added to make the programmer's intention explicit to the compiler and reader. For example:  

[**Try it live.**](http://ideone.com/JUgS5J)  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct B 
{
    virtual void a(int);
    virtual void f();
    virtual void g() const;
    void k(); // not virtual
    virtual void h(char);
};

struct D : B
{
    void a(float) override; // doesn't override B::a(int) (wrong signature)
    void f() override; // overrides B::f()
    void g() override; // doesn't override B::g() (wrong type)
    void k() override; // doesn't override B::k() (B::k() is not virtual)
    void h(char); // overrides B::h()
};
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Error given by gcc compiler when there is a problem with an override attempt is  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
error: ‘void foo::foo()’ marked override, but does not override.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

The case of the `D::h(char)` is curious. gcc doesn't give a warning when the `override` keyword is not used.
This is likely to avoid a volcano of warnings when compiling older code. 

The `override` keyword is very useful. It makes the code more readable by making the programmer intention 
explicit and avoids potential problems by catching, otherwise silent errors, at compile time. 
Common bugs such as missing a function constatnness or being careless with function siganture when 
overriding can be avoided.

**Recommendation:**  
- Use of `override` keyword is encouraged.  

###Override controls: final
`final` keyword can be used to prevent inheriting from classes or simply preventing overriding methods in derived classe. For example:

[**Try it live**](http://ideone.com/EoJz91).  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct Base1 final { };
 
struct Derived1 : Base1 { }; // ill-formed because the class Base1 has been marked final

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct Base2 
{
    virtual void f() final;
};
 
struct Derived2 : Base2 
{
    void f(); // ill-formed because the virtual function Base2::f has been marked final
};
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Using `final` closes the possibility of better implementation of functions in derived classes.  

**Recommendation:**
No recommendation.

###Control of defaults: default and delete
In C++11, the programmer can instruct the compiler not to create certain defaults by using the specifier `= delete`. 
This is particularly useful in two cases: 

1) Making objects non-copyable:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct NonCopyable 
{
    NonCopyable() = default;
    NonCopyable(const NonCopyable&) = delete;
    NonCopyable & operator=(const NonCopyable&) = delete;
};
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

2) Preventing implicit conversion of function arguments:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct NoInt 
{
    void f(double i);
    void f(int) = delete;
};
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

The specifier `= default` can be used to state the programmers intention:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
struct SomeType 
{
    SomeType() = default; //The default constructor is explicitly stated.
    SomeType(OtherType value);
};
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

However, the verbosity here is redundant, it is useful as a declaration of intention.  

For classes, the default generated functions are always public. Programmer can control the 
visibility of the defaults by using `= default`.

The current STAR guidelines state that "each class should have an assignment operator and a copy constructor" 
which forces programmers to implement their own copy functions even when they want the default behavior. 
The specifier `default` casts this guideline and avoids the pitfalls of implementing copy/assignment constructors
with default behavior.

**Recommendation:**  
The current STAR guideline should be changed to:  
- Each class should have an assignment operator and a copy constructor or defaults should be explicitly requested.  
- Do not implement your own copy/assignment when member-wise copy is desired.  
- *Implement your own copy/assignment when class is a resource-handler or delete them.*  
- No guidance on other uses of `= delete`.  

###Control of defaults: move and copy:
In addition to constructors, control of defaults can be used for copy/move assignment operators or constructors and destructor.
However, one should pay attention to the [Rule of Five](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_three_%28C%2B%2B_programming%29).
Stated roughly by Stroustrup:   

> 1) If any move, copy, or destructor is explicitly specified (declared, defined, =default, or =delete) by the user, no move is generated by default.   
> 2) If any move, copy, or destructor is explicitly specified (declared, defined, =default, or =delete) by the user, any undeclared copy operations 
> are generated by default, but this is deprecated, so don't rely on that.

This means that for backward compatibility STAR rule of mandating definition of copy assignment operator and constructor means that
move semantics will *not* be generated by default. This is good.  

Now, if we maintain the STAR guideline on copy assignment/constructor it will be a good practice to ask programmers 
to be explicit about their desires for the move counterparts (that is if we eventually allow the move semantics).  

**Recommendation:**  
- Pay attention to the Rule of Five.  
- Be explicit about your intentions for the move semantics.  

###In-class member initializers
C++98 allows in-class member initialization for const static members only. C++11 allows in-class member initialization for any variable.
For example:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
Class foo
{
  public:
    int x = 1;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

This is basically equivalent to using initialization lists in constructors. The advantage of in-class initialization is that it allows
consistent default initialization when there are multiple constructors and saves a lot of typing resulting in cleaner codes.  

Constructor initialization overrides in-class initialization.

**Recommendation:**  
- In-class member initialization should be encouraged.  

###RVO and copy elision
This is a note that will become useful later.  
Return value optimization (RVO) and copy elision are both implemented in gcc compiler.  
The copy elision as an implementation of the *as-if* rule of the standard which states that a compiler is 
allowed to do optimization to avoid unnecessary copying if the behavior of the program is the same *as if* 
all the requirements of the standard has been fulfilled. Furthermore,  

>The term return value optimization refers to a special clause in the C++ standard which goes even further than the 
> "as-if" rule: an implementation may omit a copy operation resulting from a return statement, even if the copy constructor has side effects.

Example:  

[**Try it live.**](http://ideone.com/yOnDk2)  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
#include <iostream>
 
struct C 
{
  C() {}
  C(const C&) { std::cout << "A copy was made.\n"; }
};
 
C f() {
  return C();
}
 
int main()
{
  std::cout << "Hello World!\n";
  C obj = f();
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Compiling and running with gcc gives:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
Hello, World!
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

So both copies (from local variable to the stack and from the stack to obj) have been optimized away. i.e. RVO 
is being used even though avoiding the copy constructor has side effect.  

You can avoid this optimization by using the gcc flag `-fno-elide-constructors`. 

###Rvalue reference and move semantics
One can find multiple practical definitions of lvalueness or rvalueness. For our purposes, the following is sufficient:  

* If you can take its address using the built-in address-of operator (&) then it is an lvalue, otherwise, it is an rvalue. OkTo a lesser degree the if-it-has-a-name rule is the if-it-has-a-name rule is 
Although it is not completely true, the [if-it-has-a-name rule](http://thbecker.net/articles/rvalue_references/section_05.html) is very useful:  
* If it has a name then it is an lvalue, otherwise, it is an rvalue.  

Rvalue reference is designated with an && as opposed to & for lvalue reference. Here is an example of function overloading to handle lvalue and rvalue arguments separately:  

[**Try it live**](http://ideone.com/RWbvln).

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;
 
int foo()
{
  return 5;
}

void print(int const& x)
{
  cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;
  cout<<x<<endl;
}

void print(int&& x)
{
  cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;
  cout<<x<<endl;
}
 
int main()
{
  std::cout << "Hello, World!\n";

  int x =6;
  print(x);  // call print on an lvalue
  print(foo()); // call print on an rvalue
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

Now this looks cool. However, the real power of the ability to distinguish between rvalues and lvalues in C++11 is to enable two things: 
1) move semantics 2) perfect forwarding. 

**Move semantics**:  
The move semantics allow to get rid of expensive copies from temporary (rvalue) objects when a move is intended. Now that we can 
detect temporary objects using rvalue references we can overload the copy/assignment functions to do the less expensive move from the temporary object 
by simply pointing the current object's pointers to the temporary object's resources and nullifying the latter's pointers. To add to the multitude of 
examples of move semantics implementation here is one:  

[**Try it live**](http://ideone.com/hKQvOj).  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
#include <cstddef>
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

class dataHandler
{
  private:
    int* mData;

  public:
    dataHandler(int x=-999): mData(new int(x)) {cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;}

    // copy constructor
    dataHandler(const dataHandler& x): mData(new int(x.data())) {cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;}

    // copy assignment operator
    dataHandler& operator=(const dataHandler& rhs)
    {
      cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;

      if(this == &rhs) return *this;
      *(this->mData) = *(rhs.mData); // copy value
      return *this;
    }

    // move constructor
    dataHandler(dataHandler&& x)
    {
      cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;
      this->mData = x.mData;
      x.mData = nullptr;
    }

    // move assignment operator
    dataHandler& operator=(dataHandler&& rhs)
    {
      cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl;

      if(this == &rhs) return *this;

      this->mData = rhs.mData;
      rhs.mData = nullptr;

      return *this;
    }

    ~dataHandler(){ cout<<__PRETTY_FUNCTION__<<endl; if(mData) delete mData;}

    inline int data() const { return *mData;}
    inline void data(int const d) { *mData = d;}
};

dataHandler get_a_dataHandler()
{
  dataHandler t(6);
  return t;
}

int main()
{
  cout<<"Testing move semantics..."<<endl;
  dataHandler t0;
  t0 = get_a_dataHandler(); // should call move assignment operator.

  dataHandler t1(get_a_dataHandler()); // should call move constructor (unless optimized away. See RVO/elision). 
 
  cout<<"... GoodBye! ..."<<endl;

  return 0;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

An rvalue reference itself is not necessarily an rvalue. For example, inside the move constructor the variable `x` is an 
rvalue reference, but it is an lvalue (you can take its address, it has a name). This case is important when one 
wants to construct base classes in a move function of the derived class. The base class move function should be invoked 
and this can be achieved by statically casting the variable x to an rvalue reference, i.e. hiding its name which can 
be acheived using std::move.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
Derived(Derived&& rhs) 
  : Base(rhs) // wrong: rhs is an lvalue
{
  // Derived-specific stuff
}

Derived(Derived&& rhs) 
  : Base(std::move(rhs)) // good, calls Base(Base&& rhs)
{
  // Derived-specific stuff
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

std::move hides the name of its arguments (static casting to an rvalue reference).  

**Perfect forwarding**:  
There is one subtlety with rvalues and deduced types. The rvalueness/lvalueness of a deduced type follows that of the initializer. For example, 
in a function template:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
template<typename T>
void print(T&& x) { cout<<x<<endl;}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

So calling print on a lvalue makes `x` an lvalue reference, same if `x` is an rvalue. Now when does this matter? It doesn't matter inside `print` itself 
since `x` is an lvalue there anyway. It matters when you want to pass `x` to another function, do you pass it as an lvalue (just `x`) or hide its 
name using std::move? The answer obviously depends on the nature of `x`, you want to preserve that. This can be achieved using std::forward. std:forward allows 
rvalue references as rvalues and lvalue references as lvalues.  


**Recommendation**:  
- Classes should have move constructor and assignment operator OR explicitly delete them.  
- Strive to define your move semantics so that they cannot throw exceptions and declare them so using `noexcept`.  
- Use std::move to pass argument to base classes in move constructor and assignment operator.  
- Use std:forward to forward arguments to classes constructors in templated functions or classes.  
- Remember that an rvalue reference is not necessarily an rvalue itself.  
- Take advantage of RVO/elision, don't be afraid to return by value.

###Smart pointers
It is a modern C++ idiom to get rid of naked pointers whenever possible. However, it is currently difficult to devise an error free scheme where smart pointers
can live in harmony with ROOT object ownership and management rules. For example:  

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ {.C}
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>
#include "TH1F.h"
#include "TFile.h"

int main()
{
  TFile f("out.root", "recreate");
  f.cd();
  std::unique_ptr<TH1F> h {new TH1F("h", "h", 100, -5, 5)};
  h->FillRandom("gaus", 10000);
  h->Write();
  f.Close();

  return 0;
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

The histogram which is handled by a unique pointer was owned by the current gDirectory. Since I politely closed the file before I exit my program 
the histogram was destroyed by ROOT memory management guy. Now at the end of main() my pointer goes out of scope and its resource needs to be freed, 
but it has already been freed!

I also imagine that STAR "WhiteBoard" of StMakers won't be easy to marry with smart pointers either.  

**Recommendation**:
- Do not use smart pointers.  

###References
Most of the examples in this document are modified versions of those in:   
- [C++11 wiki page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11).   
- Stroustrup's [C++11 FAQ](http://www.stroustrup.com/C++11FAQ.html).
